1. Introduction
Currently one witnesses a discontent with conventional
models of development and modernization that are founded on
material progress and the application of science and
technology. Such criticism tried to identify the limitations of
developmental theories that are Eurocentric in setting western
cultural values and instrumental rationality as the goal of all
civilizations. The attempt to seek an alternative resolution and
conception of modernity, usually concentrates on what is
neglected, suppressed and discarded out of the conceptions of
western modernization [6]. To this extent the role of
indigenous knowledge, the wisdom of non-western societies
and alternative conceptions of modernity emerges as a focal
point of analysis.
Just like other developing nations of the world, in the
Ethiopian context modernity is seen as a foundation of
development and societal progress. Despite the fact that
Ethiopia was not colonized, still a narrow conception of
modernity as a progress driven by instrumental mastery of the
environment, dominates discussions of modernity in the
Ethiopian context. Such a vision manifests itself on individual
visions of a better life as well as societal rationalization.
Whereas for the Ethiopian subject, modernity is seen as
imitating the model of western rational man, at the level of
society, modernity is seen as embodying the values of western
industrialist societies and values of consumerism and
individualism. An alternative reading of Ethiopian modernity
going beyond Eurocentric modernization reveals that Ethiopia
just like other nations of the world is endowed with a unique
culture, normative systems, conceptions of reality and societal
progress. As such, the Ethiopian conception of modernity
must pay attention to Ethiopian precursors of modernity found
within literary, artistic and philosophical forms of expression
among others. The Ethiopian vision of modernity must also be
a critical articulation of the Ethiopian experience and
existential predicament while at the same time glancing at the
idea of modernity in general seen as a process of individual
and societal rationalization.
Emperor Tewodros II started the process of the modern
Ethiopian state formation, after bringing an end to the ear of
the princes. Introducing a unique vision of Ethiopian
modernity, the emperor sought to lay out the normative and
instrumental foundations to Ethiopian modernity. To this
extent, the emperor sought to challenge the existing orthodoxy
by trying to question church authority, building a centralized
administration and building a modern army [4]. Whereas at
the domestic realm the emperor tried to create a unified
Ethiopian state ruled by strict rules and laws, in the foreign
stage he sought to establish relations with the major European
powers as a way of accelerating instrumental growth.
I will start off my discussion by discussing the question of
modernity and how modernity is generally perceived as a
process of westernization. This is followed by the second
section in which I discuss the dominant ways in which
modernity is perceived in the Ethiopian context and how this
has engendered a view of progress as one that is economic,
material, technical and instrumental. In the third section in
return I will discuss an alternative Ethiopian vision of
modernity presented throughout the modernization schemes
of emperor Tewodros II. I will here discuss the significance of
the emperor’s vision to the attempts to understand the nature
and realization of modernity in Ethiopia.
2. Challenging Idea of Modernity as a
Process of Westernization
The concept of modernity is predicated on the assumption
that the exercise of rationality at an individual level leads to
overall progress and emancipation. Alongside these lines,
modernity’s departure from pre-modern times is seen in the
interrogation of tradition and authority and in return the search
for truth in the force of the better argument and continual
dialogue. Such quest is an individual pursuit because it’s the
individual who through the power of logic scrutinizes custom
and tradition. It is also founded on the idea that enlightenment
and rationality is the only path to progress and development.
As the German philosopher Habermas puts it, “the
demythologization of worldviews means the desocialization
of nature and the denaturalization of society.” [13].
For the proponents of the modern project, rationality leads
to uncovering the nature of reality, existence and the nature of
Being. Socially, modernity leads into positive interpersonal
relations and social institutions that are accountable and
transparent in their nature. Politically, modernity leads into the
institution of a democratic culture and individual freedom.
Technically, it leads into a control over the environment.
Generally, the more we become modern, the more the goals of
human life are attained. Here, “freedom and rationality will
lead to social progress through virtuous, self-controlled work,
creating a better material, political and intellectual life for all”
[6]. Using the arguments of Anthony Giddens in his The
Consequences of Modernity one could argue that in the world
of globalization one finds the ultimate realization of the goals,
dreams and aspirations of the modern age on a global level.
Here, modernity is conceived as “modes of social life or
organization which emerged in Europe from about the
seventeenth century onwards and which subsequently became
more or less worldwide in their influence.” [12] Thus
globalization entails not a farewell to modernity but a
heightened stage in which modernity is raised to a universal
ideal.
Despite the attempt to herald scientific progress,
technological advancement and human progress in the world
of globalization as the realization of modernity, some
especially African philosophers argue that modernity is
Eurocentric in situating Western modern society as the goal of
human civilization and also degrading non-Western cultures
and indigenous knowledge. The historical encounter amongst
African and Western systems of knowledge is made possible
by the colonial legacy. Still there are diverging views in
relation to the type of colonization that was used in order to
subdue the colonized. Many scholars argued mental
colonization was used to justify the rule and conquest of
Europeans and that it had an aim of making the colonized
people inferior and of deserving domination. Here Kwasi
Wiredu argued for a need of conceptual decolonization,
whereas Ngugi centered on exposing cultural colonization and
Ehiedu Iweriebor focused on interrogating the psychology of
colonialism.
Although, African states begun to gain independence and
hence the era of colonialism started to end following the
Second World War. There is only a change in the mode or type
of colonialism and that colonialism didn’t really end. What’s
raised here is the issue of mental colonization. As Ngugui
WaThingo puts it “Berlin of 1984 was affected through the
sword and the bullet. But the night of the sword and the bullet
was followed by the mourning of the chalk and the black
board. The physical violence of the battlefield was followed
by the psychological violence of the classroom. But where the
former was visibly brutal, the latter was visibly gentle” [19]
Thus, Western systems of knowledge propagated the
superiority of the West and inferiority of non-Western
indigenous knowledge.
For Eze, behind the greatest modern European philosophies
and philosophers, was held an exclusivist assumption that
Europe possessed the greatest achievements in human history,
and that it should be imitated. For these views “Europe is the
model of humanity, culture, and history in itself” [10] Eze
holds that, African philosophy labors under a betrayal of
modern reason which meant freedom and emancipation for the
European, and exploitation for the other. Furthermore, the
Eurocentric assumptions are being echoed in the dominant
philosophical, artistic, literary and economic models these
days which all posited Europe as the normative ideal.
Currently, abiding by Western models, Africans are trying to
imitate liberal democracy, free market economy and an
education guided by a science and technology that is
detrimental to Africa’s own indigenous forms of knowledge
and philosophy. Having looked at the narrow conception of
modernity as westernization, let’s analyze the prospect of
laying the ground for a process of modernization within the
Ethiopian context.
3. Eurocentrism and the Ethiopian
Discourse of Modernity
The analysis of modernization in Africa for Klinghoffer [15]
needs to go beyond modernity as a universal thesis, advocacy
of consumerism, popular participation as a goal of modernity
and economic development as the basis of modernization.
Thus, “economic modernization in Africa does not necessarily
lead to political development; problems of instability,
administrative in- efficiency, and inability to exercise state
authority occur even as the economy advances.” [15] There is
also a need to unravel the Eurocentric normative assumptions
that are at work in African educational systems in the name of
realizing scientific and technological progress.
In the Ethiopian context, the introduction of modern
education is an integral aspect of the process of modernization
continued by emperor Menelik II. Here secular institutions
were established and scholarships were being given to
students to provide the bureaucracy with the required
manpower. Thus, “The functioning of the state bureaucracy,
the diplomatic corps, and the economy owed a lot to the
modernization of Ethiopian education and the nascent
secularization of administrative institutions.” [1] Building on
the foundations of Emperor Menelik II, Emperor Haile
Selassie introduced a radical reform in the system of education
which includes the opening of more schools and establishment
of a ministry of education. Still the resistance of the masses to
education and the already existing unequal relations amongst
members of the society had a negative impact on educational
reform.
Bahru Zewde [5] attempts to celebrate Ethiopia’s
modernity and entrance into the new millennium must be
coupled with an analysis of the contradictions of the past,
opening up of a space for equal participation and rational
administrative imperative. Thus, “what has been sorely
lacking amidst all these festivities is a sober and balanced
assessment of the past millennium” [4]Bahru further
maintains that the contradictions of Ethiopian modernity
could be expressed in the achievements of the two
Zar’aYacobs. The first one is the king Zar’aYacob who
instituted central administration and strong empire at the
expense of total control and the lack of freedom in the life of
subjects. The second one constitutes the philosopher
Zar’aYacob who was a liberal and rationalist thinker that
sought to establish a model for religious pluralism.
Donald Crummey [7] assumes that the need to situate the
interaction between modern Ethiopia and Europe needs to go
beyond an account of diplomatic relations and integrate
reconstructive elements in culture and knowledge systems.
Specifically, the adoption of western ideas of modernity in the
Ethiopian soil must be analyzed. Crummey claims, “I argue
that the relations between Ethiopia and Europe cannot be
naively understood for a central component of the relationship,
from the Ethiopian side, was the appropriation of modernity”
[7] As such the relations between Ethiopia and Europe must be
understood in terms of the uneven power relations dictating
the diffusion of western cultural values in other cultures and
also the fact that the relation emerged from a body of
knowledge that is Eurocentric in its nature.
There is a need to situate the discourse of modernity in the
existing realities of the Ethiopian context. There was an
attempt to situate the dialectics between the local and global in
framing the discourse of modernity in Ethiopia.
Understanding modernity required a holistic approach that
situated modernity in social, political, value-oriented and
economic questions of rationality were being probed. For
Andreas Eshete, [2] starting from its genesis, modernity has
been an ambiguous project causing controversies centering on
questions of, to what extent is modernity a clear departure
from pre-modern times? How did it propagate the exercise of
subjective rationality, when did it start and where? Based on
this, Andreas argues, “I doubt that either the key originating
elements can be definitely singled out or when it first made its
appearance can be fixed with finality” [2] Furthermore, most
conceptions of history are dictated by the myth of historical
progress and history as a linear path of enlightenment.
Andreas argues that the project of modernity stands even
without a recourse to metaphysical systems and cumulative
visions of history and one could salvage the notion of
modernity as declaring the arrival of the unique present and
exercise of subjective rationality to examine the human
condition. Thus, “Still, the historical self-consciousness of
modernity noted earlier, as well as a sense of its uniqueness,
can exist in the absence of any commitment to grand
narratives about the course of human history.” [2].
In heralding the prospects of modernity, Andreas also
cautions against the other side of modernity manifesting itself
in asymmetrical power relations, economic inequality, racism
and destruction of human life. Still this doesn’t overlook the
fact that modernity provided the stage for human realization in
a form of a common cause. Andreas sees calls for justice and
antagonism towards feudalism as manifestations of the
Ethiopian discourse of modernity. The precursors and
multidimensional features of the Ethiopian discourse of
modernity are witnessed in diverse conduits such as the
written philosophy of ZeraYacob, the Dekike Estifanos,
economic modernization propounded by Gebre-Heywat
Baykedagn and the political project of modernity that
Ethiopian rulers introduced serving bureaucratic, material and
technical considerations. Still the most radicalized
manifestation of Ethiopian modernity finds expression in the
Ethiopian student movement which questions ascribed status,
hierarchical relations, and envisions equality, justice and
freedom guided by socialist principles. Thus” Socialism was
championed because it would serve the aspiration to bring
about modernity by revolutionary means.” [2] A second major
gateway to modernity found expression in the aesthetic
movement of modernism that is less conceptual and more
practical and focused in the transient and suppressed. A large
continuum didn’t emerge between the student movement and
modernism and” the sensibility of modernism vividly
exemplified essential virtues of modernity: individuality,
freedom, bold exploration of novel possibilities and a robust
worldliness. Even though, it may not have prompted change in
the institutions and practices of the practical world” [2].
For Donald N. Levine, most analysis of modernization in
the world focus on conceiving cultures as static and limited
and nations as the centers of analysis. This overlooks
interactions and similarities amongst cultures, cultural
dynamism and new networks emerging as a result of such
interactions. Thus Levine argues that his approach, “treats
modernization not within the contours of a particular nation
society, singular or plural, or that adopts an increasingly
familiar perspective of the world society. It focuses rather on
lines of modernization flow that influence one country to
another” [16] For Levine, modernization consists of
uniqueness, novelty and advancement also paving the ground
for processes of learning with outside cultures. Here, Levine
seeks to identify relations amongst the modernizations of
Japan characterized by unity, protocol and military strength,
Ethiopia’s unique and centralized modernity as well as
Rastafarianism in Jamaica. Here, Ethiopia just like Japan
sought modernization as a response to outside cultural threat
and aggression. Recognizing the striking similarities amongst
the modernizations of Ethiopia and Japan attempts were made
to include such visions in academia, literary works and to
ground the need for technical dominance in a strict form of
administration. Thus, “Ethiopian intellectuals became known
as ‘Japanizers’. They worked to advance connections between
the two states in order to facilitate this transformation” [16]
The success of the Ethiopian model of modernization in the
face of European threat served to drive the element of
decolonization and pan Africanismthat fueled the pan African
image. Here Rastafarianism consisted of religious, economic,
political and cultural elements. Furthermore the elements of
Rastafarianism rhymed with the mystic and religious urges of
the Japanese youth. Thus, “Jamaica Rasta served as the
medium for the appropriation of Ethiopia-derivative elements
into modern Japanese culture. [16].
4. Emperor Tewodros II as a Precursor
of Ethiopian Modernity
In the previous sections, I have tried to identify the
inseparable relation between modernity and eurocentrism and
the need to recognize the multifaceted nature of modernity in
the Ethiopian context. Here, I argue that rather than
conceiving Ethiopian modernity as an extension of the
European or realization of the European model of instrumental
rationality in the Ethiopian context, the unique features of
Ethiopian modernity need to be affirmed. As a practical
example, the vision of modernity introduced by emperor
Tewodros II needs to be taken into consideration. Rather than
conceiving modernity as a universal process of rationalization
and situating the destiny of all societies on a similar trajectory,
the unique features of different projects of modernity need to
be recognized. This could be achieved through a critical
appropriation of the notion of multiple modernities. The idea
of multiple modernities conceives modernity as emerging in a
particular cultural, social, political and institutional
framework. The conception also doesn’t necessarily assume
that diverse modern projects will converge on a historical path.
Thus, “the core of multiple modernities lies in assuming the
existence of culturally specific forms of modernity shaped by
distinct cultural heritages and sociopolitical conditions.” [8].
Diverging interpretations of modernity emerge from the
conflict between diversity and oneness, experience and
seclusion and partiality and objectivity. For Eisenstadt, the
world of globalization doesn’t constitute the emergence of
modernity in a global scale, conflicts among ideologies or a
zeal for the past. On the contrary, one witnesses attempt to
reground the project of modernity in different soils and
cultural programs. As such, “all these developments and
trends constitute aspects of the continual reinterpretation,
reconstruction of the cultural program of modernity” [9]
Using the notion of multiple modernities one could explore
the existence of unique conceptions of modernity in the
Ethiopian context.
In observing the quest for modernity in Ethiopia, Paulos
Milkias [18] argues that the logical consequences of
Ethiopia’s quest for modernization stemmed from Western
system of knowledge, education and cultural awareness that
seek to dismantle the feudal system and found discomfort with
the realities of the Ethiopian condition. Currently in the
globalized era it is time to face the implication of such a quest
in the antagonism between modern scientific and traditional
localized systems of knowledge. From the outset, there was a
failure to recognize the antithesis between feudalism and
modernization in the discourse on modernity. As such,
“feudalism and modernization are by their very nature
incongruous and cannot live side by side without creating
fissures in the body politic” [18] Grounding itself in the
transition from the church to public schools as agents for the
dissemination of knowledge and education, being modern in
Ethiopia constituted a minimal role of the church and the
important role of secular institutions. Thus, “the image of the
new political order was drawn in terms of a new ideology:
Zamanawi-seletane (modernity) which meant modern
institutions, modern schooling, and modern thinking.” [18]
Even the genesis of modernity in Ethiopia for PaulosMilkias
signified overcoming religion and tradition and is clearly
evident in the modernization efforts of emperor Tewodros II.
Here Paulos remarks, “not only was Tewodros anti-clerical,
but he saw the development of Ethiopia as going necessarily
against the influence of the church.” [18] Thus, the ground for
the struggle between tradition and modernity also took the
form of education and the dissemination of knowledge.
Bahru Zewde argues that the huge interest in emperor
Tewodros II in Ethiopian history emanates from several
factors. These include his success in emerging from a lower
social status to excel in the court life, his zeal for establishing a
unified Ethiopian state and the attempt to implant the seeds of
modernization in Ethiopia. Bahru argues“ his fascination
emanates from a host of attributes: his meteoric rise from
plebeian background to the pinnacle of royal power, his
single-minded dedication to the restoration of the power and
glory of the monarchy, and above all his compulsive drive to
modernize his country.” [5] The emperor was conscious of the
underdevelopment of his nation, and as a way out sought to
establish relations with European nations to appropriate their
latest advancements. I believe that emperor Tewodros II could
be seen as a precursor to the Ethiopian discourse on modernity
in a number of ways. He brought an end to the era of the
princes and set the foundations to the Ethiopian modern state
by unifying the different provincialities. Furthermore, he had a
firm belief that material wealth is a foundation of modernity
and that its radical reforms in the military and land rights that
could accelerate Ethiopia’s development. The emperor’s
influence is also seen on the thoughts of different intellectual
like Gabra-HeywatBaykadan who tried to realize the visions
of the emperor.
The emperor above anything else set the foundations to
Ethiopian modernity by bringing an end to the Zamena
Mesafent. From the outset he set his eyes on a unified Ethiopia
and a centralized authority aided by successes in the military
and relations with the existing foreign powers of the world. On
his rise to the imperial throne, Kasa carefully crafted an image
of a ruler who restores Ethiopia’s glory. Such an image is
founded on the prophecy of the coming of a certain Tewodros
who will pacify the country on the way to greatness. Bearing
upon such existing societal narrative, Kasa casted himself as
the protector and unifier of the nation and thus also appealed
to “an apocryphal writing which lent considerable authority to
the idea of a messianic Tewodros.”[17] Beyond anything else,
what the emperor instilled in the hearts and the minds of others
is the idea that Ethiopia’s glory will be restored under a strong
state and that“the old idea of an Ethiopian empire united under
a Christian Solomonic monarch was still viable” [17] As
YonasAdmasu puts it, “Tewodros, who seems to have started
it all with his vision of a untied and modernized Ethiopia, had
a helping hand from Menelik II.” [20].
Yonas maintains that the coming to power of emperor
Tewodros II by itself signifies the replacement of one
symbolic order by another one. The order of the solomonic
dynasty as such was replaced by the power of emperor
Tewodros II who didn’t trace his lineage into such a bloodline.
Yonas remarks here, “It is one of the paradoxes of history (or,
is it?), that such a hero should be provided by the very system
against which the new generation rose-up-in-pens. One such
hero was readily provided by nineteenth century Ethiopia in
the person of Emperor Tewodros II” [20] Tewodros’ rise to
power as such signified the dawn of a new era, where the
turmoil and political intrigues of the era of the princes are
replaced by a hierarchical order, established authority and the
quest for a glorious nation.
The emperor also laid the foundational blocks to Ethiopian
modernity in his belief that a strong state needs to be sustained
by a strong material background and economic prosperity. As
such, in an attempt to secure a firm foundation for his visions
of modernity, the emperor tried to institute a firm material
foundation for his state. He believed that it is a wealthy state
that could only introduce such grand measures of
modernization. To this extent, he tried to introduce new land
ownership rights that subsequently led “into collision with the
Ethiopian orthodox church” [20]. This conflict with the
established authority that is a key spirit of modernity, only
hastened the downfall of the emperor, although he showed in
the process that a strong Ethiopian state was not conceivable
without challenging the power of the church. Ultimately the
emperor failed to realize his goals of societal and structural
transformation, for he was challenged by a fierce power
struggle in the domestic sphere, and externally, “from the
Europeans whom he had expected to come to his aid, he
received only indifference or insolence” [20] For Edmond
Keller, once he came to power, emperor Tewodros II
introduced two major reforms as the foundations of his vision
of modernity. First of all, the emperor assumed a highly
central role and thereby diminished the power of regional
administrators. To this regard, the emperor also eliminated
powerful rivals and appointed “trusted officers in his military
or members of the royal family” [14] Secondly, the emperor
also sought to establish a modern and a well trained army.
Bahru further contends that the success of Emperor
Tewodros’s radical visions of modernization ultimately
depended in the strength of his military power and the
implementation of reforms introduced in the organization of
the military. As such, “to Tewodros, who owed his political
power more to his military prowess than to his genealogy, the
central role of the army must have been even more vital.” [3]
The emperor particularly made an effort to restructure the
military in terms of its form, abidance to strict rules and access
to modern European weapons. At the last resort, the military
lacked the vision and persistence that was required to execute
the directives set out by the emperor. The efforts of the
emperor were not only reserved to the attainment of central
authority and instrumental success, but also extended into the
cultural realm as well. During the time of the emperor’s rule,
besides a process of centralization, Bahru sees “witnessed the
birth of a fairly well-developed literary Amharic.” [3] The
emperor established a school where students can excel in
instrumental and technical knowledge. Still, for Bahru such a
quest was not animated by the need to accelerate all rounded
development but “with obsession with the manufacture of
firearms” [3].
For Bahru, despite all his efforts to introduce programs of
modernization that set to establish the foundations for a
modern Ethiopian state, Emperor Tewodros II still could not
overcome the political factions and divisions brought forth by
the Zamena Mesafent. As such, “the military and
administrative reforms he envisaged were bereft of economic
and technological bases” [3] One particular area in which the
force of the Zamena Mesafent was an obstacle to Ethiopia’s
modernity is seenin the system of administration that the
emperor tried to introduce. Despite the emperor’s effort to
institute a highly centralized and strong government, rival
groups and political dissidence existed throughout his reign.
The emperor as such was not able to curb the power of
regional rulers. Recognizing the contribution of emperor
Tewodros to Ethiopian modernity, Andreas Eshete contends
that the founders of Ethiopia’s modernity including emperor
Tewodros II had a deeper vision that the foundation of societal
transformation lies in introducing a centralized system of
administration. They believed that instrumental success is the
key to defend Ethiopia’s territorial sovereignty as well as
realizing material development. Accordingly, “they were
resolved to introduce modern systems of administration and to
harness modern technology, both to defend Ethiopia’s
independence and to deploy her rich human and material
resources effectively.” [2] The quest for a unified Ethiopian
state against foreign aggression and internal instability was
initiated by emperor Tewodros II, although it culminated in
the efforts of emperor Menelik II.
Emperor Tewodros exerted a huge impact on modern
Ethiopian intellectuals. His visions of centralized order,
regulation of the relation between the ruler and the people
through a strict law and the need to mobilize the masses for
developmental endeavors, easily resonated with Ethiopia’s
intellectuals. One of the intellectuals who strived to realize the
goals of the emperor is Gabra-Heywat Baykadan. Bahru
argues” His passion for ser'at was picked up by the leading
reformist intellectual of the early twentieth century,
Gabra-Heywat Baykadan. His small but powerful booklet,
Atse Menilekna Ityopya, was as much a vindication of the
visionary Tewodros as a veiled critique of Menilek” [2] In his
work, Atse Menelik and Ethiopia, Negadras Gebre-Heywat
Baykedagn argues that the development of one’s nation and its
historiography cannot be separated from one another.
Furthermore, for the realization of development and a strong
and progressive government, there must be an enlightened
society. Here the reason why the modernization programs of
Emperor Tewodros were not practically implemented is
because of the absence of societal rationalization. [11].
5. Conclusion
In today’s world, the idea that modernity is an exclusively
western product is beginning to be challenged. As part of such
a critique, efforts are being made to identify different ways of
looking at the idea of modernity especially from the vantage
point of non-western cultures. This is predicated on the
assumption that since the quest for novelty and societal
inventory is an urge that exists in different societies of the
world, there is a need to extract the wisdom of different
cultures and societies of the world. Within the Ethiopian
context, the quest for change and continual progress has
always been one crucial element of history. Here different
literary, philosophical, economic and political works emerged
trying to posit diverging interpretations of Ethiopian
modernity. In the realm of politics and administration, nothing
parallels the achievements of emperor Tewodros II who saw
his task as modernizing the nation and accelerating all
rounded progress. The emperor particularly excelled in
questioning existing land rights, challenging the power of
established authority and laying foundations for instrumental
development. Although the efforts of the emperor were
seriously undermined by existing power struggles, the level of
literacy of the people and resistance of the army to such
dramatic reforms, the emperor still managed to instill the idea
that a stronger Ethiopian nation driven by material
development, radical reforms and new social, political and
economic reality was possible. As such, even today where the
question of Ethiopian modernity is at the forefront of
intellectual discussions, the contribution of emperor Tewodros
II to Ethiopia’s modernity needs to be once again explored.
